describe how to build logical agents that can represent information and draw conclusions such as those described in the preceding paragraphs. 7.3 Logic This section summarizes the fundamental concepts of logical representation and reasoning. These beautiful ideas are independent of any of logic’s particular forms. We therefore postpone the technical details of those forms until the next section, using instead the familiar example of ordinary arithmetic. In Section 7.1 , we said that knowledge bases consist of sentences. These sentences are expressed according to the syntax of the representation language, which specifies all the sentences that are well formed. The notion of syntax is clear enough in ordinary arithmetic: “ ” is a well-formed sentence, whereas “ ” is not. Syntax A logic must also define the semantics, or meaning, of sentences. The semantics defines the truth of each sentence with respect to each possible world. For example, the semantics for arithmetic specifies that the sentence “ ” is true in a world where is 2 and is 2, but false in a world where is 1 and is 1. In standard logics, every sentence must be either true or false in each possible world—there is no “in between.” 2 Fuzzy logic, discussed in Chapter 13 , allows for degrees of truth. Semantics Truth  x + y = 4 x4y+ = x + y = 4 x y x y 2  Possible world When we need to be precise, we use the term model in place of “possible world.” Whereas possible worlds might be thought of as (potentially) real environments that the agent might or might not be in, models are mathematical abstractions, each of which has a fixed truth value (true or false) for every relevant sentence. Informally, we may think of a possible world as, for example, having men and women sitting at a table playing bridge, and the sentence is true when there are four people in total. Formally, the possible models are just all possible assignments of nonnegative integers to the variables and . Each such assignment determines the truth of any sentence of arithmetic whose variables are and . If a sentence is true in model , we say that satisfies or sometimes is a model of . We use the notation to mean the set of all models of . Model Satisfaction Now that we have a notion of truth, we are ready to talk about logical reasoning. This involves the relation of logical entailment between sentences—the idea that a sentence follows logically from another sentence. In mathematical notation, we write Entailment x y x + y = 4 x y x y α m m α m α M(α) α α ⊨ β to mean that the sentence entails the sentence . The formal definition of entailment is this: if and only if, in every model in which is true, is also true. Using the notation just introduced, we can write (Note the direction of the here: if , then is a stronger assertion than : it rules out more possible worlds.) The relation of entailment is familiar from arithmetic; we are happy with the idea that the sentence entails the sentence . Obviously, in any model where is zero, it is the case that is zero (regardless of the value of ). We can apply the same kind of analysis to the wumpus-world reasoning example given in the preceding section. Consider the situation in Figure 7.3(b) : the agent has detected nothing in [1,1] and a breeze in [2,1]. These percepts, combined with the agent’s knowledge of the rules of the wumpus world, constitute the KB. The agent is interested in whether the adjacent squares [1,2], [2,2], and [3,1] contain pits. Each of the three squares might or might not contain a pit, so (ignoring other aspects of the world for now) there are possible models. These eight models are shown in Figure 7.5 . 3 Although the figure shows the models as partial wumpus worlds, they are really nothing more than assignments of true and false to the sentences “there is a pit in [1,2]” etc. Models, in the mathematical sense, do not need to have ’orrible ’airy wumpuses in them. Figure 7.5 Possible models for the presence of pits in squares [1,2], [2,2],