7.2 The Wumpus World In this section we describe an environment in which knowledge-based agents can show their worth. The wumpus world is a cave consisting of rooms connected by passageways. Lurking somewhere in the cave is the terrible wumpus, a beast that eats anyone who enters its room. The wumpus can be shot by an agent, but the agent has only one arrow. Some rooms contain bottomless pits that will trap anyone who wanders into these rooms (except for the wumpus, which is too big to fall in). The only redeeming feature of this bleak environment is the possibility of finding a heap of gold. Although the wumpus world is rather tame by modern computer game standards, it illustrates some important points about intelligence. Wumpus world A sample wumpus world is shown in Figure 7.2 . The precise definition of the task environment is given, as suggested in Section 2.3 , by the PEAS description: PERFORMANCE MEASURE: for climbing out of the cave with the gold, for falling into a pit or being eaten by the wumpus, for each action taken, and for using up the arrow. The game ends either when the agent dies or when the agent climbs out of the cave. ENVIRONMENT: A grid of rooms, with walls surrounding the grid. The agent always starts in the square labeled [1,1], facing to the east. The locations of the gold and the wumpus are chosen randomly, with a uniform distribution, from the squares other than the start square. In addition, each square other than the start can be a pit, with probability 0.2. ACTUATORS: The agent can move Forward, TurnLeft by , or TurnRight by . The agent dies a miserable death if it enters a square containing a pit or a live wumpus. (It is safe, albeit smelly, to enter a square with a dead wumpus.) If an agent tries to move forward and bumps into a wall, then the agent does not move. The action Grab can be   +1000 −1000 −1 −10 4 × 4 90∘ 90∘ used to pick up the gold if it is in the same square as the agent. The action Shoot can be used to fire an arrow in a straight line in the direction the agent is facing. The arrow continues until it either hits (and hence kills) the wumpus or hits a wall. The agent has only one arrow, so only the first Shoot action has any effect. Finally, the action Climb can be used to climb out of the cave, but only from square [1,1]. SENSORS: The agent has five sensors, each of which gives a single bit of information: ‐ In the squares directly (not diagonally) adjacent to the wumpus, the agent will perceive a Stench. 1 Presumably the square containing the wumpus also has a stench, but any agent entering that square is eaten before being able to perceive anything. ‐ In the squares directly adjacent to a pit, the agent will perceive a Breeze. ‐ In the square where the gold is, the agent will perceive a Glitter. ‐ When an agent walks into a wall, it will perceive a Bump. ‐ When the wumpus is killed, it emits a woeful Scream that can be perceived anywhere in the cave. The percepts will be given to the agent program in the form of a list of five symbols; for example, if there is a stench and a breeze, but no glitter, bump, or scream, the agent program will get [Stench,Breeze,None,None,None]. Figure 7.2 1 A typical wumpus world. The agent is in the bottom left corner, facing east (rightward). We can characterize the wumpus environment along the various dimensions given in Chapter 2 . Clearly, it is deterministic, discrete, static, and single-agent. (The wumpus doesn’t move, fortunately.) It is sequential, because rewards may come only after many actions are taken. It is partially observable, because some aspects of the state are not directly perceivable: the agent’s location, the wumpus’s state of health, and the availability of an arrow. As for the locations of the pits and the wumpus: we could treat them as unobserved parts of the state—in which case, the transition model for the environment is completely known, and finding the locations of pits completes the agent’s knowledge of the state.