brains—the process corresponds to the real-world relationship whereby some aspect of the real world is the case by virtue of other aspects of the real world being the case. This correspondence between world and representation is illustrated in Figure 7.6 . 7 As Wittgenstein (1922) put it in his famous Tractatus: “The world is everything that is the case.” Figure 7.6 Sentences are physical configurations of the agent, and reasoning is a process of constructing new physical configurations from old ones. Logical reasoning should ensure that the new configurations represent aspects of the world that actually follow from the aspects that the old configurations represent. The final issue to consider is grounding—the connection between logical reasoning processes and the real environment in which the agent exists. In particular, how do we know 6  α 7  that is true in the real world? (After all, is just “syntax” inside the agent’s head.) This is a philosophical question about which many, many books have been written. (See Chapter 27 .) A simple answer is that the agent’s sensors create the connection. For example, our wumpus-world agent has a smell sensor. The agent program creates a suitable sentence whenever there is a smell. Then, whenever that sentence is in the knowledge base, it is true in the real world. Thus, the meaning and truth of percept sentences are defined by the processes of sensing and sentence construction that produce them. What about the rest of the agent’s knowledge, such as its belief that wumpuses cause smells in adjacent squares? This is not a direct representation of a single percept, but a general rule—derived, perhaps, from perceptual experience but not identical to a statement of that experience. General rules like this are produced by a sentence construction process called learning, which is the subject of Part V. Learning is fallible. It could be the case that wumpuses cause smells except on February 29 in leap years, which is when they take their baths. Thus, may not be true in the real world, but with good learning procedures, there is reason for optimism. Grounding KB KB  KB