CHAPTER ONE BASIC CONCEPTS Many persons who are not conversant with mathematical studies imagine that because the business of [Babbage’s Analytical Engine] is to give its results in numerical notation, the nature of its processes must consequently be arithmetical and numerical, rather than algebraical and analytical. This is an error. The engine can arrange and combine its numerical quantities exactly as if they were letters or any other general symbols; and in fact it might bring out its results in algebraical notation, were provisions made accordingly. — AUGUSTA ADA, Countess of Lovelace (1843) Practice yourself, for heaven’s sake, in little things; and thence proceed to greater. — EPICTETUS (Discourses IV.i) 1.1. ALGORITHMS The notion of an algorithm is basic to all of computer programming, so we should begin with a careful analysis of this concept. The word “algorithm” itself is quite interesting; at first glance it may look as though someone intended to write “logarithm” but jumbled up the first four letters. The word did not appear in Webster’s New World Dictionary as late as 1957; we find only the older form “algorism” with its ancient meaning, the process of doing arithmetic using Arabic numerals. During the Middle Ages, abacists computed on the abacus and algorists computed by algorism. By the time of the Renaissance, the origin of this word was in doubt, and early linguists attempted to guess at its derivation by making combinations like algiros [painful]+arithmos [number]; others said no, the word comes from “King Algor of Castile.” Finally, historians of mathematics found the true origin of the word algorism: It comes from the name of a famous Persian textbook author, Ab¯u ‘Abd All¯ah Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a al-Khw¯arizm¯ı (c. 825) — literally, “Father of Abdullah, Mohammed, son of Moses, native of Khw¯arizm.” The Aral Sea in Central Asia was once known as Lake Khw¯arizm, and the Khw¯arizm region is located in the Amu River basin just south of that sea. Al-Khw¯arizm¯ı wrote the celebrated Arabic text Kit¯ab al-jabr wa’l-muq¯abala (“Rules of restoring and equating”); another word, “algebra,” stems from the title of that book, which was a systematic study of the solution of linear and quadratic equations. [For notes on al-Khw¯arizm¯ı’s life and work, see H. Zemanek, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 122 (1981), 1–81.] 1 2 BASIC CONCEPTS 1.1 Gradually the form and meaning of algorism became corrupted; as ex- plained by the Oxford English Dictionary, the word “passed through many pseudo-etymological perversions, including a recent algorithm, in which it is learnedly confused” with the Greek root of the word arithmetic. This change from “algorism” to “algorithm” is not hard to understand in view of the fact that people had forgotten the original derivation of the word. An early German mathematical dictionary, Vollständiges mathematisches Lexicon (Leipzig: 1747), gave the following definition for the word Algorithmus: “Under this designation are combined the notions of the four types of arithmetic calculations, namely addition, multiplication, subtraction, and division.” The Latin phrase algorith- mus infinitesimalis was at that time used to denote “ways of calculation with infinitely small quantities, as invented by Leibniz.” By 1950, the word algorithm was most frequently associated with Euclid’s algorithm, a process for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers that appears in Euclid’s Elements (Book 7, Propositions 1 and 2). It will be instructive to exhibit Euclid’s algorithm here: Algorithm E (Euclid’s algorithm). Given two positive integers m and n, find their greatest common divisor, that is, the largest positive integer that evenly divides both m and n. E1. [Find remainder.] Divide m by n and let r be the remainder. (We will have 0 ≤ r < n.) E2. [Is it zero?] If r = 0, the algorithm terminates; n is the answer. E3. [Reduce.] Set m ← n, n ← r, and go back to step E1. Of course, Euclid did not present his